---
title: Super Congress A Gift to K Street
author: Ron Paul
date: August 8, 2011
---

The Super Congress created by the recent debt ceiling increase deal is
a typical example of something nefarious attached to a bigger bill that
is rushed through Congress without giving Members ample opportunity to
consider the full ramifications. This commission may turn into an early
Christmas present for the well-heeled lobbyists of K Street. This is
because the commission presents a huge opportunity for lobbying firms
to sneak their client's pet projects and issues into whatever
legislation is created by the commission. The fact that automatic cuts
to defense are named if the committee deadlocks simply signals to the
military industrial complex to bring their A game to the lobbying
effort.

One red flag I am constantly aware of in my position as a Congressman
is that highly complex and convoluted legislation frequently has
dangerous provisions hidden in the fine print. Elaborate legislative
packages force lawmakers to take the bad with the good, and often if
they refuse, they are accused of voting against the positive provision
- never mind the blatant Constitutional violations in the bill, the
spending, the waste, and the unchecked expansion of government. I don't
usually have to read too much of a bill like that before encountering
something unconstitutional, or simply unwise. Then I have to vote no.

That doesn't seem to be the case with a majority of legislators,
unfortunately. In order to ram through one special interest's favorable
treatment or giveaway, a certain amount of horse-trading is done. The
end result is mammoth bills with myriads of unrelated provisions that
favor those with the best lobbyists at the expense of everyone else.

The creation of a 12 member committee to preside over \$1.5 trillion in
spending decisions, and the exclusion of the rest of Congress also
means lobbying firms can focus their efforts on an anointed few, which
is certainly more manageable for them than having to deal with the
entire Congress. Every cut considered will, of course, have a recipient
on the other end whose livelihood is being threatened. The probable
outcome is that any cuts realized will be more a function of lobbying
prowess than the merits or demerits of the actual programs on the
chopping block.

Make no mistake - I am enthusiastically for cutting government
spending. The goal should be to eventually reduce government down to
the size and scope of its constitutional limitations. However, the
process of getting there must also be constitutional. Concentrating
such special authority to fast track legislation affecting so many
special interests to a small, select committee is nothing more than an
unprecedented power grab. Only fears of an impending catastrophe could
have motivated Members to allow this legislation to be rushed through
Congress. The founding fathers had strong feelings about taxation
without representation and under no circumstances would they have felt
excluding 98% of Congress from fiscal decisions was appropriate.

I see nothing good coming out of this Super Congress. I suspect it will
be highly vulnerable to corruption and special interests. No benefit
can come from such careless disregard of the Founders' design.
