---
title: The Keys to Economic Growth
author: Ron Paul
date: June 13, 2011
---

Recent economic data show that U.S. job growth in May was negligible,
while the official unemployment figure-- at least the figure the Labor
Department admits to-- rose to 9.1%. The real unemployment figure,
however, as compiled by economist John Williams, may well be higher
than 20%. It is clear the U.S. economy is in terrible shape, and that
no amount of government spending or Federal Reserve quantitative easing
can reduce unemployment, increase real productivity, or address our
debt fiasco.U.S. jobs and productivity are dependent on the
accumulation of private capital to finance existing businesses or fund
new entrepreneurial activity. Private capital-- whether accumulated by
profitable U.S. businesses, invested by private equity and venture
capital firms, or attracted from abroad-- is the key to economic growth
and new jobs. But we cannot create jobs if we demonize profits, punish
risk-taking capitalists, and stay hostile to foreign investment.

The steps to encouraging capital investment and creating new jobs in
America are simple, though not easy:

* First and foremost, we must create a sound U.S. currency backed by
gold or some other commodity respected by the market. No nation in
history with a rapidly depreciating currency has attracted private
capital. Unless and until we prohibit the Treasury and Federal Reserve
from essentially creating money and credit from thin air, we cannot
restore the U.S. economy.

* Second, we must create a favorable regulatory environment for U.S.
business. This cannot be stressed enough. When businesses don’t know
what’s coming next from the EPA, when Obamacare spikes their healthcare
costs, or when the Dodd-Frank bill adds almost unknowable regulatory
compliance burdens, businesses simply will not expand and hire. It is
time to start shrinking the federal register.

* Third, we must stop spending trillions of dollars overseas on foreign
wars. There is no point in debating a foreign policy we cannot afford.
It no longer matters what neoconservatives want. Our interventionist
foreign policy is financed on credit, and our credit limit has been
reached. Our economy would be infinitely better off if those trillions
of dollars had never been removed from the private economy or added to
our debt.

* Finally, we must completely revamp the U.S. tax system and move to a
territorial model that does not tax foreign source income. U.S.
corporations are sitting on more than a trillion dollars in foreign
earnings that cannot be repatriated to the U.S. because of taxes. We
need an immediate tax holiday to bring those earnings home. Better yet,
we need to abolish the income tax altogether.

The U.S. economy is in deep trouble. Congress needs to act immediately
to restore the rule of law and create an environment that rewards,
rather than punishes, the critical components of any healthy economy:
capital accumulation and investment.

In this struggling economy it is essential for politicians to take a
step back and think about what government has been doing to business in
this country. In less than 200 years, the free market, property rights,
and respect for the rule of law took this nation from a rough frontier
to a global economic superpower. Today, however, our nation and our
economy clearly are headed in the wrong direction.

Of course, America has never enjoyed absolute free-market capitalism:
creeping government intrusion and special interest political patronage
have existed and increased since our founding. But America historically
has permitted free markets to operate with less government interference
than other nations, while showing greater respect for property rights
and the rule of law. Less government, respect for private property, and
a relatively stable legal environment allowed America to become the
wealthiest nation on earth.

By contrast, the poorest nations almost always demonstrate hostility
for free markets, private property, and the rule of law. Capital
formation, entrepreneurship, credit, and wealth accumulation are
uniformly discouraged in poor countries. Private contracts are not
reliably enforced, and private property is not secure in the hands of
owners. The predictable result is widespread poverty and misery.
