---
title: European Debt Crisis Threatens the Dollar
author: Ron Paul
date: November 14, 2011
---

The global economic situation is becoming more dire every day.
Approximately half of all US banks have significant exposure to the
debt crisis in Europe. Much more dangerous for the US taxpayer is the
dollar's status as reserve currency for the world, and the US Federal
Reserve's status as the lender of last resort. As we've learned in
recent disclosures, this has not only benefitted companies like AIG,
the auto industry and various US banks, but multiple foreign central
banks as they have run into trouble. Nothing has been solved, however,
by offering up the productivity of Americans as a sacrificial lamb.
Greece is set to be the first domino to fall in the string of European
economies at risk. Rather than learning from Greece's terrible example
of an over-consuming public sector and drowning private sector, what is
more likely from our politicians is an eventual bailout of European
investors.

The US has a relatively small exposure to overwhelmed Greek banks, but
much larger economies in Europe are set to follow and that will have
serious implications for US banks. Greece is technically small enough
to bail out. Italy is not. Germany is not. France is not. It is
estimated that US banks have over a trillion dollars tied up in at-risk
German and French banks. Because the urge to paper over the debt with
more credit is so strong, the collapse of the Euro is imminent. Will
the Fed be held responsible if the Euro brings the US dollar down with
it?

The most disingenuous aspect of the narrative about the European
sovereign debt crisis is that entire economies will collapse if more
resources are not bilked from productive people around the world. This
is untrue. Tough times are coming for the banks, to be sure, but free
people always find a way back to prosperity if the politicians leave
them alone. Communities within Greece are coming together and forming
barter systems because they know the Euro is becoming unstable. Greeks
are learning how to engage in commerce with each other, without the use
of fiat currency controlled by central banks. In other words, they are
rediscovering what money really is, and they are trading with each
other in ways that cannot be controlled, manipulated, squandered,
inflated away and generally ruined by corrupt bankers and the
politicians that enable them. Farmers will still grow food, mechanics
will still fix cars, people will still make things and exchange them
with each other. No banker, no politician can stop that by destroying
one medium of exchange. People will find or create another medium of
exchange.

Unfortunately when politicians try to monopolize currency with legal
tender laws, the people find it harder and harder to survive the
inflation and taxation to which they are subjected. Bankers should take
their dreaded haircut rather than making innocent people pay for their
mistakes. The losses should be limited and liquidated, rather than
perpetuated and rewarded. This is the only way we can recover.

Government debt is often considered rock solid because it is backed by
a government's ability to forcibly extract interest payments out of the
public. The public is increasingly unwilling to be bilked to make
bankers whole. The riots and the violence in Greece should tell us
something about the sustainability of this system.

If we continue to bail out banks and bankers so they can continue to
lose money, if we cavalierly put this burden on the taxpayer, it is all
too predictable what will happen here.
