---
title: Government is Already Too Involved in Healthcare
author: Ron Paul
date: June 25, 2012
---

This week the Supreme Court is expected to issue its long-awaited
decision regarding the constitutionality of the "Obamacare" law. I
[recently
discussed](http://j.mp/U4bFdu)absurd
legal arguments by Obamacare advocates that Congress can compel the
purchase of health insurance, and the dismal record of federal courts
applying so-called "judicial review" in protecting liberty. It is
obvious that Obamacare's legal apologists either are wholly ignorant of
constitutional principles, or wholly lawless in their blatant disregard
for those principles.

Likewise, supporters of Obamacare are willfully ignorant of basic
economics. The fundamental problem with health care costs in America is
that the doctor-patient relationship has been profoundly altered by
third party interference. Third parties, either government agencies
themselves or nominally private insurance companies virtually forced
upon us by government policies, have not only destroyed doctor-patient
confidentiality. They also inescapably drive up costs because basic
market disciplines-- supply and demand, price sensitivity, and profit
signals-- are destroyed.

Obamacare, via its insurance mandate, is more of the same misdiagnosis.

Gabriel Vidal, Chief Operating Officer of a U.S. hospital system, sees
this problem squarely in his daily work. [As he
explains](http://j.mp/U4bFdv), Obamacare will only make matters
worse because it fails to recognize that "costs are out of control
because they do not reflect prices created by the voluntary exchange
between patients and providers... like every well-functioning industry."

Instead, "health costs reflect the distortions that government
regulators have introduced through reimbursement mechanisms created by
command-and-control bureaucracies at federal and state levels," he
continues. "But it is theoretically and practically impossible for a
bureaucrat- no matter how accurate the cost data, how well-intentioned
and how sophisticated his computer program- to come up with the correct
and just price. The (doctor-patient) relationship... has been corrupted
by the intrusion of government and its intermediaries (HMOs, for
example) to such an extent that we can no longer speak of a relationship
that can produce meaningful pricing information."

Absent such pricing information, our system increasingly resembles
socialist systems with centralized price setting, shortages, rationing,
apathy, and declining quality of care. As the situation deteriorates,
fewer bright young people want to practice medicine and fewer foreign
doctors seek to immigrate.

The problem is acute and worsening. Obamacare's third party insurance
mandate is only the first step toward what the political left really
wants: a single payer government healthcare system.

Meanwhile, conservatives seem resigned to a third party insurance system
and therefore fail to present a viable alternative to the American
people. They continue to speak in terms of saving the healthcare
"system," when in fact what America needs is a rejection of all
government systems in favor of free market mechanisms.

In a free market, most Americans would pay cash for basic services and
maintain inexpensive high-deductible insurance for catastrophic injury
or illnesses only. Health insurance would be decoupled from employment,
which would unleash entrepreneurs who now fear quitting their jobs and
losing their health insurance. Costs would plummet due to real
competition among doctors, price sensitivity among patients, and
elimination of enormous paperwork costs. Doctors would be happier,
spending their time treating patients rather than managing their
practices.

Congress needs to let markets work by aggressively repealing healthcare
laws, including: the HMO Act of 1973; the Medicare Part D prescription
drug benefit passed in 2003; and the Obamacare bill passed in 2010.
Furthermore, we must begin scaling back Medicare coverage altogether for
younger generations so they will not rely on a system that cannot remain
solvent in future decades. Only by taking these steps now can we begin
to undo the harm done by government to the once noble field of medicine.
