---
title: An Administration Gone Rogue
author: Ron Paul
date: March 12, 2012
---

Have certain parts of the Constitution become irrelevant, as a former
Republican leader once told me at a Foreign Affairs Committee hearing?
At the time, I was told that demanding a Congressional declaration of
war before invading Iraq, as Article I Section 8 of the Constitution
requires, was unnecessary and anachronistic. Congress and the president
then proceeded without a Constitutional declaration and the disastrous
Iraq invasion was the result.

Last week, Obama administration officials made it clear that even the
fig leaf of Congressional participation provided by the 2003
"authorization" to use force in Iraq was to be ignored as well.  In a
hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Defense Secretary
Leon Panetta stated clearly and repeatedly that the administration felt
it was legally justified to use military force against Syria solely with
"international permission". Such "international permission" could come
by way of the United Nations, NATO, or some other international body.
Secretary Panetta then told Senator Sessions that depending on the
situation, the administration would consider informing Congress of its
decision and might even seek authorization after the fact.

While Senator Sessions expressed surprise at the casual audacity of
Panetta in making this statement, in reality his was just a bluntly
stated explanation of what has been, de facto, the case for many years.
When President Obama committed the US military to a pre-emptive war
against Libya last year, for example, Congress was kept completely out
of the process. Likewise, military action in Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia,
Yemen, and so on, proceed without a Congressional declaration. In fact,
we haven't had a proper, constitutional declaration of war since 1942,
yet the US military has been engaged in Korea, Lebanon, Iraq, Bosnia,
Liberia, Haiti, and Libya with only UN resolutions as the authority.
Congress's only role has been authorizing funds, which it always does
without question, because one must "support the troops".

Of course we should reserve our harshest criticism for Congress rather
than the Administration. If the people's branch of government abrogates
its Constitutional authority to the Executive branch, who is to blame?
Who is to blame that Congress as a body will not stand up and demand
that the president treat the Constitution as more than an anachronistic
piece of paper, or merely a set of aspirations and guidelines? The
Constitution is the law of the land and for Congress to allow it to be
flouted speaks as badly about Congress as it does about a president who
seeks to do the flouting.

Just last week the administration announced that it would begin
providing material support to the rebels who seek to overthrow the
Syrian government. Was Congress involved in this decision to take sides
in what may develop into a full-fledged civil war? And what of reports
that US special forces may already be operating inside Syria? Still,
Congress sits silently as its authority is undermined. Does anybody
really wonder why approval numbers for Congress are so low?

Many of my colleagues who stood by as then-President Bush used the
military as a kind of king's army are now calling for Congress to act
against this president for openly admitting that is his intent. I agree
it is time for Congressional action in response to these attacks on our
Constitution, but the solution is simple and Constitutional. The
solution is simply voting to withhold funds, since Congress has the
power of the purse. No money for undeclared wars!
